A beautiful loop:
An active inference theory of consciousness
Ruben Laukkonen1, Karl Friston6, & Shamil Chandaria2,3,4,5
1

Faculty of Health, Southern Cross University, Gold Coast, Australia
Centre for Eudaimonia and Human Flourishing, Linacre College, Oxford University, UK
3
Centre for Psychedelic Research, Division of Brain Sciences, Imperial College London, UK
4
Institute of Philosophy, The School of Advanced Study, University of London, UK
5
Fitzwilliam College, University of Cambridge, UK
6
Institute of Neurology, University College London, UK
2

ABSTRACT
Can active inference model consciousness? We offer three conditions implying that it can. The first
condition is the simulation of a reality or generative world model, which determines what can be
known or acted upon; namely an epistemic field. The second is inferential competition to enter the
world model. Only the inferences that coherently reduce long-term uncertainty win, evincing a
selection for consciousness that we call Bayesian binding. The third is epistemic depth, which is
the recurrent sharing of the Bayesian beliefs throughout the system. Due to this recursive loop —
in a hierarchical system (such as a brain) — the world model contains the knowledge that it exists.
This is distinct from self-consciousness, because the world model knows itself non-locally and
continuously evidences this knowing (i.e., field-evidencing). Formally, we propose a hyper-model
for precision-control across the entire hierarchy, whose latent states (or parameters) encode and
control the overall structure and weighting rules for all layers of inference. This Beautiful Loop
Theory is deeply revealing about meditation, psychedelic, and altered states, minimal phenomenal
experience, and provides a new vision for conscious artificial intelligence.
Key words: Consciousness; Awareness; Active Inference; Predictive Processing; Free Energy; Meditation; Psychedelics;
Sleep; Dreaming; Unconscious; Bayesian Inference; Artificial Intelligence; Neuroscience; Computational Modelling

1


1.

INTRODUCTION

Consciousness is perhaps the biggest mystery in science. At a certain point, most fields of inquiry find that
the strange capacity of organisms to experience cannot be overlooked. Books, articles, and media discussing
the nature of consciousness abound, with unique perspectives emerging from psychologists, neuroscientists,
philosophers, phenomenologists, computer scientists, biologists, physicists, and contemplatives. Yet, most
would agree that consciousness remains an inconvenient enigma in a world that otherwise seems reducible
to things, objects, patterns, and equations.
Equally, it is clear that the tools of science can reveal something about the nature of consciousness.
Thousands of experiments attest that consciousness has predictable characteristics, predictable correlates,
and fluctuates under predictable conditions (Koch et al., 2016; Frith, 2021). Thanks to this growing
evidence base, an array of impressive theories of consciousness (ToCs) have emerged in recent years
(Rosenthal, 2000; Seth & Bayne, 2022; Carruthers, 2017; Tononi, 2008; Baars, 2005). These theories have
many strengths and explanatory power but a general consensus in the scientific community does not exist.
Even the metaphysical assumptions underlying the science of consciousness still result in fierce debates
(Kuhn, 2024; Fleming et al., 2023; Kastrup, 2008).
Here, we aim to contribute to these theories by building on a promising general theory of organisms,
known as active inference or predictive processing, under the free energy principle (Friston, 2010; Clark,
2013; Hohwy, 2013; Seth & Tsakiris, 2018). Several others have proposed that active inference may
provide solutions to different features of conscious experience (e.g., Hohwy, 2022; Hohwy & Seth, 2020;
Safron, 2020; 2022; Carhart-Harris et al. 2014; Rudrauf et al. 2017; Friston, 2018; Williford et al. 2018;
Clark, 2019; Kanai et al., 2019; Chang et al. 2020; Deane, 2021; Whyte & Smith, 2021; Whyte et al., 2024).
Nevertheless, it remains unclear whether active inference can satisfy the conditions for a ToC. Yet others
have proposed that we should think of active inference as providing "...theories for consciousness science,
rather than ToCs per se" (Seth & Bayne, 2022, p. 446). The question arises, what conditions would active
inference need to satisfy in order to cross the ToC threshold? Why is it that the theory is so successful in
explaining perception, cognition, and action, but not consciousness itself?
To address these questions, we propose three conditions that seem necessary for consciousness and
show how some active inference systems satisfy them. The first condition is a generative world model, or
epistemic field. This provides the 'space' or contents that can be known, hence the term epistemic
(Metzinger, 2020). The second condition is inferential competition, which determines what becomes
conscious and why it is coherent (i.e., addressing the binding problem). The third and final condition is
epistemic depth, which refers to the fact that the epistemic field is recursively, and widely (i.e., deeply)
shared throughout the system. As we will see, this idea has some similar characteristics to "broadcasting"
(Dehaene et al., 2003), "information integration" (Tononi, 2008), and "fame in the brain" (Dennett, 2001),
albeit with important differences.
Below, we will introduce one condition at a time. We will then show how active inference can provide
a parsimonious explanation for a range of cognitive processes and states of consciousness when these
conditions are satisfied. Our view also implies that the most basal or minimal form of awareness is a highly
simplified (nearly contentless) world model knowing itself non-locally. Therefore, a first person

perspective, self-modeling, and agency, are not prerequisites of awareness, but are rather local or
"contracted" forms of consciousness (Metzinger, 2020).
To be concise, we will avoid an extensive literature review (see Seth & Bayne, 2022; Frith, 2021; or
Lau, 2022 for reviews on ToCs). However, as noted above, many features of the theory (reviewed in Table
2 of the discussion) are consistent with elements of other ToCs such as Global Neuronal Workspace Theory
(GNWT, Dehaene et al., 2003), Higher Order Theories (HOT, Lau and Rosenthal, 2011), Recurrent
Processing Theory (RPT, Lamme and Roelfsema, 2000; Pennartz et al., 2019) and Integrated Information
Theory (IIT, Tononi, 2008). Links with existing theories will be made throughout. The strength of our
approach will be in showing how the interactions of a minimal set of computational assumptions within
active inference may provide the ingredients for consciousness, with implications for understanding various
states from lucid dreaming to meditation, to psychedelics, as well as artificial intelligence. 